here they are they just saw the most
incredible Miracle of all he
transcending even the ten plagues the
crushing of Pharaoh's Army they are
walking through a sea that allows them
dry land now they fear God and believe
in God and believe in Moses they already
have faith in both for at least yes this
will last right you can count it in
hours that is just again it's such a
it's brilliant that it has that line hey
guess what they just saw this they have
faith for her yeah totally finite amount
of time Miracles don't work and people
should not rely on them for Faith well
that's the difference between faith and
proof in some sense right that's a very
that's good that's right yes but even if
you've got proof it doesn't last a
miracle should be proved right right no
that's what that's also an indication of
their inadequacy well the thing the
thing about proof even proof in some
sense if you think about it technically
proof can't work in relationship to the
Horizon of the future because if it's
true that the future differs
qualitatively from the past which seems
to be the case that it's literally not
predictable then even if something did
work in the past that's the scandal of
induction just because something did
work in the past doesn't mean it's going
to work in the future and so that means
that in some real sense I think this is
fundamentally true in some real sense
you cannot confront the Horizon of the
potential of the future
without faith there that is what you use
to confront that because other otherwise
it's mere repetition of the past in
which case it's not really the future at
all it's not potential and so that must
be Associated too with that the idea of
the word that confronts potential at the
beginning of the time time that's truth
serving love in some sense but it's also
going to be something like faith in the
ability of potential to bring forth the
order that is good because he never
confronted otherwise
and so so science no the Natural
Sciences need a kind a degree of Faith a
degree of credence when when you're
trying to sort of make make predictions
of scientists trying to make predictions
and apply hypotheses you're right there
is well the faith would be that that
that which corrects your prediction
because maybe you'd like your prediction
to be true but even more fundamentally
you have to believe that the
Transcendent object that corrects your
presuppositions is good yeah and that
and that on making contact with that
serves the good and governed by
regularities and patterns and
life-giving orders well otherwise you'd
think you'd think more like Prometheus
right you'd think well we don't want to
make contact with the Transcendent
object as scientists because we'll be
presumptuous it'll just destroy us like
you could easily and you know there's
some reason to think that way because
God only knows what you're to discover
scientifically but that isn't how
scientists Orient themselves they think
well we're following our internal logos
and we're making contact with the logos
of the world and if we do that
diligently and ethically then the result
will be good that's a replication of the
biblical pattern my secularists never
have a view of freedom because cause and
effect is always looking back right and
you can't look forward to the scientific
method yeah well in that well this the
thing is in some sense at that point
science devours itself because I don't
think there's any credible scientific
evidence that we're deterministic and I
think there's a fair bit of credible
scientific evidence that not only are we
not but we can't be and neither is the
world it's more that they can't couldn't
possibly be scientific evidence that we
are free because the determinist just
says it takes takes a step of faith and
says that all of our actions can be
explained all our Behavior can be
explained in terms of physical causes
and physical effects but the person who
believes in free agency just says that's
not an exhaustive account of how we act
now there's no scientific way to settle
that you might say look I believe that
I'm free I believe that I can lift up
this cup and I've believe that more
firmly than any skeptical argument you
could bring okay sometimes Penrose
certainly believes that we cannot
compute The Horizon of the future
deterministically and so even if we
don't have free will
we have something that isn't
deterministic because determinism per se
doesn't work but Penrose does believe in
proofs he comes up with the famous whole
King Penrose Singularity theorem yeah
behind the Big Bang so UK and he's a
kind of platonist as well I think we
talked about talked about this before so
if you're kind of you can say that there
are mathematical proofs there are proofs
sure but they couldn't be in this as it
were in the physical order so you know
we'd be perfectly happy giving kids
mathematics textbooks from the 1950s if
they could still kind of understand them
we'd be very worried if we were giving
kids physics textbooks from the 1950s
because science is moving along all the
time and so there does that there's just
not you know the skepticism is healthy
in scientific inquiry in fact you can
almost guarantee that the science is
going to be very different in 2031 40
years time and yet it's because it's
acquired this kind of sacred status
scientific knowledge a kind of this is
actually the source of all certainty
well science is actually the process not
the consequence in some real sense right
and it sounds like a science denier well
certainly well one of the things you
learned Thomas too is that it's very you
cannot teach people to be a scientist
by you cannot teach a person to be a
scientist by teaching them scientific
doctrines or scientific facts because
people like to think of science as a
collection of facts but if you look at
how science is practiced it's actually
primarily a system of apprenticeship so
you go into a lab with a scientist who's
a practitioner and a researcher and you
learn in an embodied sense how to
conduct yourself as a researcher and
most of that some of it's technical
some of it's administrative but a huge
part of it is ethical and that's
especially true on the statistical front
because
if you don't treat the revelation of
your experiment
100 ethically you won't discover
anything that's real and you warp your
career in the scientific Enterprise so
fundamentally what you're apprenticing
in is an ethic of an ethic of humble of
humble approach and responsibility and
that's the embodied training as a
scientist and no one says that really in
a scientific paper because it's a given
but but it's not it's not an obvious
given when you start to think about it
philosophically this is also the thing
that that Larry was bring up last night
about teachers being taught teaching
methods rather than having a
philosophical basis from which to teach
and we see this a lot
[Applause]
right where there's a lot of courses and
programs and degrees and certificates
that teach you writing and you can study
writing all the way through but then you
have all the skills and craft of writing
with then what are you going to write
about because you've only been studying
how to write right and this is part of
that you and I we talk about this a lot
about that the dislocation between
avatars of meaning and what they're
supposed to be attached to it's like
there's this floating away and it's the
it's sort of like the senseless rote
work that's removed from the
undergirding meaning in all these fields
and the attempt to reduce to Method well
the ethic you talk about the one of the
maddest maybe the only time my father
got mad at me academically was in early
high school and I was like debating like
fudging some results exhausted at like
two in the morning and nothing was
working in a science lab and he was like
there's no like he was mad at me with
the full Fury of his hypocratic Oak oath
as a physician it was like you don't do
that right you don't do that that's not
allowed as something that you can do
right well that's well and that I can't
help but see that as a religious vow it
is I will not falsify the data and
that's the data if it's real data that's
a pattern there's a pattern in that and
what the data represents is the
Transcendent object and and that's a
technical part of science because you're
trying to falsify your hypothesis